In this lecture, you'll learn about port security, which we can use to secure our ports on our switches.
First thing I'll talk about while we're on this subject is its best practice to shutdown any unused interfaces.
So if you've got any parts in your switch that don't have anything plugged in to them right now, then
you should shutdown those parts.
The reason for this is it stops somebody unauthorized coming along, plugging into the port and getting
onto the network.
OK, so on to port security. Port security enables an administrator or you to specify which MAC address
or addresses can send traffic into an individual switchport. So that can be used to lock a port down
to a particular host or hosts.
So see the example in the picture here. I've got PC1, which has got MAC address 1.1.1
and on port fa0/2 on the switch, which is where it's plugged in,
I configure port security on there and actually the only MAC address 1.1.1 is allowed
to send traffic into this port.
So port security,
it works on MAC addresses.
So we do that,
and then if somebody comes along and wants to connect into the network and they disconnect PC1 and
they plug a different PC into the same cable, it's going to have a different MAC address.
So this one's got MAC address 2.2.2 that then send traffic into the network, comes in
with a source MAC of 2.2.2 which is not the allowed
MAC address of 1.1.1. So the switch will drop that traffic.
But, it's easy to spoof a MAC address. That scenario that I just gave you there, if this was an attacker doing
it and they knew the MAC address of the existing host was 1.1.1, they can easily
change their MAC address to 1.1.1.
You can do that in software in a few seconds.
So locking ports down to a specific host is not
what port security is actually usually used for in production networks. There's a different thing that we
can use it for.
Port security can also configure individual switchports
to allow only a specified number of source MAC addresses to send traffic into the port and it can learn
the MAC addresses that are coming in.
Of course it can do that.
It's a switch.
It's what switches do. So what we configure here is on that switchport again on the switch fa0/2,
we say that we're going to allow only one MAC address to send traffic into this port.
We don't specify what the MAC address is, but because PC1 is connected in right now, the switch
will learn
that the current MAC address is 1.1.1.
And what this allows us to do, why it's useful, is it prevents users from adding wireless access points
or other shared devices on to your network.
So we've got the same network again here where we've got the switch on port fa0/2. We enabled
port security on there.
We're going to allow one MAC address and it learned 1.1.1.
And then what happens is that one of your users says there's not enough wall port in this part of the building.
There's too many people.
We can't get them all connected into the wall and the IT helpdesk take too long to fix things and
get back to me.
So I'm going to do it myself.
And the user goes and takes a wireless access point from home and they plug that into the port.
And hopefully it's obvious that this is a big problem because a user doesn't really know much about
networking.
They're not going to put the correct security settings in a wireless access point.
Maybe that part of the building is right next to the car park and they go and put a wireless access
point in
there that has got unrestricted access on it.
Now, anybody can pull up in your car park and get onto your network.
So that's a huge security concern.
Well, port security can stop that from happening.
So say the user does do that.
They connect another wireless access point or maybe it's another switch into that switch.
And now we've got PC1 with MAC 1.1.1 and PC2,
with MAC 2.2.2, both trying to use that physical port fa0/2 on
the switch, but it's only allowed one MAC address, which is 1.1.1 right now.
So now, when that additional PC with MAC 2.2.2, tries to send traffic into the network, the switch
is going to drop it. That's what port security is most commonly used for in production networks.
To configure this, very simple if you don't add any additional parameters, it's configured at the interface
level.
So we would say interface fa0/2 and then switchport port-security.
It's configured at the interface level.
But obviously, typically you would enable this on all ports on your switch, not just one.
If you do configure port security like we did just there with no additional parameters, then only one
MAC address is allowed to transmit on the port by default.
These are all the default settings.
With that, the current MAC address can be disconnected and replaced.
The port is not locked down to a particular MAC address. So save it,
host MAC address 1.1.1
is currently plugged in and transmitting.
That's fine.
It's only one MAC address.
If, you then disconnect that host, well, the port will go down because there was nothing on the other
end.
You then plug in another host with MAC address 2.2.2. the port goes
live again.
The switch will learn the new MAC address of 2.2.2 and that host can transmit now.
So when you do it like this with the default setting, it locks it down to just one MAC address.
So you can't have multiple people behind a wireless access point or a switch.
But the actual MAC address that is on
there can be changed.
So if a shared device is connected and multiple hosts are trying to transmit, the port will be shutdown.
But if it's only ever one at a time, doesn't matter which one it is, that will be allowed.
To verify your port security settings, the command is show port-security and then the interface that
you want to check. Here we're checking interface fa0/2.
I can see here that port security has been enabled. The violation mode is shutdown.
Meaning if I get more than one MAC address transmitting on this port, I'm going to shut the port down.
We'll cover the other violation modes later in this section. The maximum MAC addresses
allowed is one. That's the default and total MAC addresses,
that's how many have been discovered right now, is also one.
The current MAC
address is ending A359.
It's in VLAN 1.
The security violation count is zero because I've only got that one MAC address. At no point has more
than one MAC address tries to transmit. So because there is no violations, the port status is secure,
meaning that port security has been enabled on here,
and it's up right now.
It has not been shutdown.
OK, so I just mentioned the security violation options. There's three options. You select one of the
three. The default is Shutdown. With this,
the interface is placed into the error-disabled state.
If there's a violation and it will block all traffic. The next option is Protect.
When you do this, traffic from unauthorized addresses is dropped.
Traffic from allowed addresses is forwarded.
So it's not going to shut the interface down.
So your legitimate host can still keep transmitting on there, but it's going to lock out any unauthorized
addresses.
The last one is Restrict, which is similar to Protect.
Again, traffic from unauthorized addresses is dropped, but with restrict, there will also be a log and
the violation counter incremented. Again, the same with protect traffic from allowed addresses is forwarded.
To change the violation action from the default of shutdown, at the interface level, switchport
port-security violation, and then either protect or restrict.
OK, if the valuation option is left at the default, which is shutdown and a violation occurs like more
than one MAC address tries to transmit on the interface, the port will move into an error-disabled
state. When it's in an error-disabled state,
the port is down. To bring an error-disabled interface back into service,
first off, remove those MAC addresses, the offending ones that are causing the problem in the first
place.
After that, you need to do a shutdown and then a no shutdown on the interface.
That's how you bring it back into service again.
So doing it that way is manual. You can also do it in an automatic way as well. So you can specify a time
interval after which a port that has been error-disabled will automatically move back into service again.
The time interval is configured in settings. The example configuration here and this one is done at the
global config level rather than at the interface
level. I've said errdisable recovery cause psecure-violation.
This means how to, what we're going to do to recover from an error-disabled interface if the cause, the
cause it to go error-disabled was a port security violation and then errdisable recovery
interval 600 means that after it first goes to error-disabled, after 600 seconds, it will automatically
come out of error-disabled and start forwarding traffic again.
Obviously, if the offending hosts are still there, it will just go back into a violation state again.
So more commonly, we would be fixing this manually with the shutdown and the no shutdown.
OK, so that is port security.
Next up, we will have a look at how to configure it in the lab.